
$Header: /Users/dossy/Desktop/cvs/aolserver/doc/Attic/threads.txt,v 1.1 2000/05/09 21:42:31 kriston Exp $

Note On Thread Interfaces:
--------------------------

The implementation of the underlying thread interface can have a noticble
effect on the overal performance of AOLserver.  While AOLserver runs on
many platforms, not all platforms perform the same with the same hardware,
e.g., the same Intel hardware provide very diferent throughput and
latency on Linux and FreeBsd.

A major influence on the overall performance is the scheduling scope of
the thread library.  Multithreading scope is often described as having
a "1-1", "1-n", or "n-m" model.  1-1 means each thread is scheduled by
the kernel along with all other threads.  1-n means one kernel thread is
actually used by all process threads and thread context switching occurs
in a user-level library.  n-m means some number of kernel threads share
the load of some larger number of process threads.  The nature of the
AOLserver workload (e.g., many simultaneous, I/O and system call bound
threads) has shown that the 1-1 model generally works best.  1-n often
does not provide enough concurrency and n-m introduces library overhead.
In general the OS vendors go to great lengths to make sure the kernel
scheduling algorithms perform very well under a variety of circumstance
whereas library implementations are generally more simplistic in design,
forced to share resources with many non-threaded processes, or require
careful wrapping of many system calls with non-blocking I/O and signal
handling.  Heavily loaded sites may realize better performance a change
in configuration, e.g., upgrading to HP/11 from HP/10 or running SGI
sproc-based nsd instead of the pthread-based nsd.

However, this does not mean that 1-n or n-m platforms should be avoided or
you should not run AOLserver unless your platform is 1.1.  In general, if
you experience reasonable performance you do not need to worry about the
performance of the underlying thread library.  In fact, there are cases
where the 1-n or n-m model may outperform, e.g., code which is somewhat
compute bound and subject to lock contention.  The reason is a 1-n or n-m
platform can switch threads when it encounters a held lock and continue
to make progress whereas a 1-1 thread must have the kernel put the
thread on a lower level wait queue, generally a more expensive operation.
Another example is a large-scale hosting environment where many customers
share a single machine.  You may find better scalability with 1-n threads
than 1-1 on the same hardware as each low-traffic customer would require
a single Unix process instead of six or more for base operation.

Listed below are the available and currently used threading models on
each platform AOLserver runs on:

Platform:	Available:	Used:	Notes:

Solaris,	1-1, n-m	1-1	1-1 appears to perform better.
UnixWare

Linux		1-1		1-1	clone()-based LinuxThreads.

SGI pthread	n-m		n-m	1-1 currently cannot be enabled.

SGI sproc	1-1		1-1	sproc-based custom interface often

					provides better performance then

					pthread-interface.

HP/10		1-n		1-n	Performs poorly under load.

HP/11		1-1		1-1	n-m currenlty cannot be enabled.

FreeBSD		1-n		1-n	rfork()-based 1-1 interface may be

					available shortly.

Apple OS/X	?		?	Likely 1-1.

DEC Unix 4.0	1-1, n-m	n-m	1-1 can be enabled but blows up

					after many thread create/exit's.

					n-m model performs well.

Windows NT	1-1		1-1	New Fiber() Win32 API may provide

					n-m in the future.
